# Debugging
by *mauro r.* 2019/10/31
### 1. Visualize Your Data
  The easiest way to find out what a program is doing
  or what it is going to do

- IO pin
- Serial output (uart,TCP , spi ... etc)
- Write to File
- Write into a RAM/FLASH section
- Use a DAC

### 2. Finding Bugs
Use isolation and activation,  the trick here is to identify all the inputs \
that induce a change  in the output of the system. How?

 - Change one variable at the time.
 - Divide and conquer by starting from a known-good state and proceding with \
 binary search
 - Create off-line models, test your algorithms in other platforms, \
  there are some functions that can be developed/tested using your OS and \
  not the target device.
 - If your bug is bewtween versions use *git bisect* to found the commit \
  that has the bug
 - Corrupted data? check neighboorhood
 - Rubber Ducking:
 A very simple but particularly useful technique for finding the cause\
 of a problem is simply to explain it to someone else.
 - Pay attention to unsafe function (printf, sprintf ,strncmp,get..etc)

#### Question to ask when facing an issue
 - Do the conditions that caused this bug exist anywhere else in the
 system?

 - Is the problem being reported a direct result of the underlying bug,
 or merely a symptom?

 - Is the bug really in the compiler? Is it in the OS? Or is it in your
 code?

### 3. Breakpoints

Hardware breakpoints are actually comparators.

 The downside of hardware breakpoints: \
 They are limited. CPUs have only a limited number of hardware breakpoints (comparators).
  - ARM 7/9 cores have 2
  - modern ARM devices (Cortex-M 0,3,4) between 2 and 6
  -  x86 usually 4.

**Properties of the BKPT**:
  - Conditionals
  - Counter
  - Run time Variable can be modified while the program is helt

#####  Odd behavior when using or not using a BKPT ?
  This comparison is time consuming


### 4. Tracing
Tracing statements are those little diagnostic messages you print to \
the screen or to a file that say things such as “got here” and “value of \
x = 2.”
It’s a primitive technique compared with IDE-style debuggers, \
but it is peculiarly effective at diagnosing several classes of errors that
debuggers can’t.

### 5. Error handling

There are two ways of handling errors
- 1- **Graceful Degradation**, the system/software does the best it can
- 2- **Hard Failure**       , the system fails louds ands stops inmidiately

*Either way the system should fail safetely!*

Functions should deal with errors as best it can, to do that we can \
 use the return of the function in combination with the use of an **assert** function.

Our **assert** function can :
- set an IO
- trigger a BKPT
- print in serial

Ideally errors shall be standarized in a file called **error_codes.h** or similar ,examples of Errors

- NO_ERROR
- UNKNOW_ERROR
- BAD_PARAMETER
- BAD_INDEX
- TIME_OUT
- CATASTROPHIC_ERROR

The above erros can  be used in combination with a **loggin interface**

- *void Log(enum eLogSubSystem sys, enum eLogLevel level, char *msg);*
- *void LogWithNum(enum eLogSubSystem sys, enum eLogLevel level, char *msg, int number);*


### 6. Tools

- C/C++ static analyzer: coverity scan ,cpa checker,  Apache Yetus,
- Task issue tracker
- HEX editors/ viewer (when dealing with file systems)
- Text editors


## Power Editing (Text Editor and text manipulation)

Programmers manipulate text the same way woodworkers
shape wood.

The daily tools that we use shall be a flawless extension of our hands.\
In that sense we shall pick a powerful editor and learn it, quite often IDE \
are designed to be good at compiling but not at handling text.

Text editor expectation:
 - Configurable All aspects shall be configurable , color window size, key strokes

 - Extensible , plugins can be added to the text editor (e.g autocomplete, advance
 search, git blame ...etc)

- Programable : be able to perform complext multitask, this can be done with
macros
#### Do I need to change or even use a text editor instead of the IDE?
 - As long as you are happy and productive, go for it! BUT if you find yourself
 struggling with your current editor, you may need to reevaluate your position.
